Sorting and Search After in Hybrid Search (#7820)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/hybrid-search.md

When sorting is applied to a hybrid search, results are fetched from the shards based on the specified sort criteria. As a result, the search results are sorted accordingly, and the document scores are `null`. Scores are only present in the hybrid search sorting results if documents are sorted by `_score`. 

In the following example, sorting is applied by `doc_price` in the hybrid query search request:

```json
GET /my-nlp-index/_search?search_pipeline=nlp-search-pipeline
{
  "query": {
    "hybrid": {
      "queries": [
        {
          "term": {
            "category": "permission"
          }
        },
        {
          "bool": {
            "should": [
              {
                "term": {
                  "category": "editor"
                }
              },
              {
                "term": {
                  "category": "statement"
                }
              }
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }, 
    "sort":[
       {
         "doc_price": {
             "order": "desc"
         }
       }
    ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The response contains the matching documents sorted by `doc_price` in decreasing order:

Reviewer: "decreasing" => "descending"?

                    100
                ]
            },
            {
                "_index": "my-nlp-index",
                "_id": "7iaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN",
                "_score": null,
                "_source": {
                    "category": "editor",
                    "doc_index": 9871,
                    "doc_price": 30
                },
                "sort": [
                    30
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

In the following example, sorting is applied by `_id`:

```json
GET /my-nlp-index/_search?search_pipeline=nlp-search-pipeline
{
  "query": {
    "hybrid": {
      "queries": [
        {
          "term": {
            "category": "permission"
          }
        },
        {
          "bool": {
            "should": [
              {
                "term": {
                  "category": "editor"
                }
              },
              {
                "term": {
                  "category": "statement"
                }
              }
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "sort":[
     {
        "_id": {
          "order": "desc"   
        }
     } 
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The response contains the matching documents sorted by `_id` in decreasing order:

Reviewer: "decreasing" => "descending"?

> The response contains the matching documents sorted by `_id` in decreasing order:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The response contains the matching documents sorted by `_id` in descending order:
```

                    "doc_index": 8242,
                    "doc_price": 350
                },
                "sort": [
                    "7yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN"
                ]
            },
            {
                "_index": "my-nlp-index",
                "_id": "7iaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN",
                "_score": null,
                "_source": {
                    "category": "editor",
                    "doc_index": 9871,
                    "doc_price": 30
                },
                "sort": [
                    "7iaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN"
                ]
            },
            {
                "_index": "my-nlp-index",
                "_id": "6yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoM",
                "_score": null,
                "_source": {
                    "category": "permission",
                    "doc_keyword": "workable",
                    "doc_index": 4976,
                    "doc_price": 100
                },
                "sort": [
                    "6yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoM"
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

## Hybrid search with search_after
**Introduced 2.16**
{: .label .label-purple }

> You can control sorting results by applying a `search_after` condition that provides a live cursor and uses the previous page’s results to obtain the next page’s results. For more information about `search_after`, see [The search_after parameter]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/searching-data/paginate/#the-search_after-parameter).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can control sorting results by applying a `search_after` condition that provides a live cursor and uses the previous page's results to obtain the next page's results. For more information about `search_after`, see [The search_after parameter]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/searching-data/paginate/#the-search_after-parameter).
```

You can paginate the sorted results by applying a `search_after` condition in the sort queries.

In the following example, sorting is applied by `doc_price` with a `search_after` condition:

```json
GET /my-nlp-index/_search?search_pipeline=nlp-search-pipeline
{
  "query": {
    "hybrid": {
      "queries": [
        {
          "term": {
            "category": "permission"
          }
        },
        {
          "bool": {
            "should": [
              {
                "term": {
                  "category": "editor"
                }
              },
              {
                "term": {
                  "category": "statement"
                }
              }
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "sort":[
     {
        "_id": {
          "order": "desc"   
        }
     } 
  ],
  "search_after":[200]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The response contains the matching documents that are listed after the `200` sort value, sorted by `doc_price` in decreasing order:

Reviewer: "decreasing" => "descending"?

> The response contains the matching documents that are listed after the `200` sort value, sorted by `doc_price` in decreasing order:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The response contains the matching documents that are listed after the `200` sort value, sorted by `doc_price` in descending order:
```

                "_index": "my-nlp-index",
                "_id": "7iaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN",
                "_score": null,
                "_source": {
                    "category": "editor",
                    "doc_index": 9871,
                    "doc_price": 30
                },
                "sort": [
                    30
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

In the following example, sorting is applied by `id` with a `search_after` condition:

```json
GET /my-nlp-index/_search?search_pipeline=nlp-search-pipeline
{
  "query": {
    "hybrid": {
      "queries": [
        {
          "term": {
            "category": "permission"
          }
        },
        {
          "bool": {
            "should": [
              {
                "term": {
                  "category": "editor"
                }
              },
              {
                "term": {
                  "category": "statement"
                }
              }
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "sort":[
     {
        "_id": {
          "order": "desc"   
        }
     } 
  ],
  "search_after":["7yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN"]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The response contains the matching documents that are listed after the `7yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN` sort value, sorted by `id` in decreasing order:

Reviewer: "decreasing" => "descending"?

> The response contains the matching documents that are listed after the `7yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN` sort value, sorted by `id` in decreasing order:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The response contains the matching documents that are listed after the `7yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN` sort value, sorted by `id` in descending order:
```

    }
  }
}
```

> ## Hybrid search with sorting

Reviewer 3: I would rather put "Using sorting with hybrid query"

> ## Using Sorting with hybrid query

Reviewer 3: `sorting` shouldn't start from capital letter

**Introduced 2.16**
{: .label .label-purple }

By default, the standard hybrid search without sorting returns search results that are ordered by scores in decreasing order.

> With the release of this feature, you can now sort the hybrid search results by providing the `sort` criteria in the search request. For more information on the sort criteria, see [sort results](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/searching-data/sort/).

Reviewer 3: Not sure we need to say "with release", just "You can apply sorting to hybrid query results by providing the `sort` criteria in the search request."

> Moreover, hybrid search when sorting applied fetches results from the shards on the basis of sort criteria passed in the search request, therefore, the search results will be sorted as per sort criteria and the scores will be `null`. Scores will be present in the hybrid search sorting results if the sort criteria is by `_score`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When sorting is applied to hybrid search, results are fetched from the shards based on the specified sort criteria. As a result, the search results will be sorted accordingly, and the scores will be null. Scores will only be present if the sort criteria include _score.
```

Author: In the last sentence you have used 
```
include _score
```
Here we can't use word include because a user cannot pass _score and another field criteria together as this case is blocked for hybrid query.

To be precise I am talking about below case

```
"sort" : [
   {
      "_score": {
            "order":"desc"
      }
   },
   {
      "_id":{
           "order": "desc"
      }
   }
]
```

Therefore, I think below line will convey this message clearly

```
Scores will only be present if the sort criteria is by _score.
```

Reviewer 3: agree

> In earlier example from aggregations section, add the sort criteria for `doc_price` in the search request

Reviewer 3: no need to mention previous section examples, this creates more confusion

```suggestion
In the following example, we use `doc_price` as the sort criteria in the hybrid query search request
```

                "_score": null,
                "_source": {
                    "category": "statement",
                    "doc_keyword": "idea",
                    "doc_index": 5212,
                    "doc_price": 200
                },
                "sort": [
                    200
                ]
            },
            {
                "_index": "my-nlp-index",
                "_id": "6yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoM",
                "_score": null,
                "_source": {
                    "category": "permission",
                    "doc_keyword": "workable",
                    "doc_index": 4976,
                    "doc_price": 100
                },
                "sort": [
                    100
                ]
            },
            {
                "_index": "my-nlp-index",
                "_id": "7iaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN",
                "_score": null,
                "_source": {
                    "category": "editor",
                    "doc_index": 9871,
                    "doc_price": 30
                },
                "sort": [
                    30
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

> Sort by `_id`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here is another example of a search query where we apply sorting by `_id`.
```

                    "doc_index": 9871,
                    "doc_price": 30
                },
                "sort": [
                    "7iaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN"
                ]
            },
            {
                "_index": "my-nlp-index",
                "_id": "6yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoM",
                "_score": null,
                "_source": {
                    "category": "permission",
                    "doc_keyword": "workable",
                    "doc_index": 4976,
                    "doc_price": 100
                },
                "sort": [
                    "6yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoM"
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

## Hybrid search with search after
**Introduced 2.16**
{: .label .label-purple }

You can control sorting results by applying `search_after` condition that provides a live cursor that uses the previous page’s results to obtain the next page’s results. For more information on `search_after`, see [search_after](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/searching-data/paginate/#the-search_after-parameter).

By applying `search_after` condition in the sort queries mentioned above, we can paginate the sort results.

> Sort by `doc_price` and `search_after` condition applied on it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the following example, sorting is applied by `doc_price` with a `search_after` condition
```

```json
{
    "took": 8,
    "timed_out": false,
    "_shards": {
        "total": 3,
        "successful": 3,
        "skipped": 0,
        "failed": 0
    },
    "hits": {
        "total": {
            "value": 4,
            "relation": "eq"
        },
        "max_score": 0.5,
        "hits": [
            {
                "_index": "my-nlp-index",
                "_id": "6yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoM",
                "_score": null,
                "_source": {
                    "category": "permission",
                    "doc_keyword": "workable",
                    "doc_index": 4976,
                    "doc_price": 100
                },
                "sort": [
                    100
                ]
            },
            {
                "_index": "my-nlp-index",
                "_id": "7iaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN",
                "_score": null,
                "_source": {
                    "category": "editor",
                    "doc_index": 9871,
                    "doc_price": 30
                },
                "sort": [
                    30
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

> Sort by `id` and `search_after` condition applied on it 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the following example, sorting is applied by `id` with a `search_after` condition: 
```

```json
GET /my-nlp-index/_search?search_pipeline=nlp-search-pipeline
{
  "query": {
    "hybrid": {
      "queries": [
        {
          "term": {
            "category": "permission"
          }
        },
        {
          "bool": {
            "should": [
              {
                "term": {
                  "category": "editor"
                }
              },
              {
                "term": {
                  "category": "statement"
                }
              }
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "sort":[
     {
        "_id": {
          "order": "desc"   
        }
     } 
  ],

>   "search_after":["7yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN"]

Reviewer 3: if `7yaM4JABZkI1FQv8AwoN` is a user provided id can we use something simpler, where order is obvious, like tiny, small, medium, large, and you pick everything after medium up to large

Author: _id is generated by system so OpenSearch can apply sort on it. tiny, small, medium, large are text and OpenSearch does not support sorting on text fields.
